

Chapter 2 (basic grammar)

Note all the operators in Common Lisp are functions, but most are.

One operator that doesn't follow the Common Lisp evaluation rule is quote.The
quote operator takes a single argument, and just return it verbatim.
For convenience, Common Lisp defines ' as an abbreviation for quote.

Two Lisp data types that we don't commonly find in other languages are symbols
and lists. Symbols are words. Ordinarily they are converted to uppercase.

Lists are represented as zero or more elements enclosed in parenthese.

In Common Lisp, there are two ways of representing the empty list. You can
represent it as a pair of parentheses with nothing between them, or you can use
the symbol nil.

In Common Lisp, the symbol t is the default representation for truth(me:boolean
 true). Falsity in Common Lisp is represented by nil, the empty list.

A function whose return value is intended to be interpreted as truth or falsity
is called a predicate. Common Lisp predicates often have names that end with p.

The simplest conditional in Common Lisp is if:
    (if (listp '(a b c)) (+ 1 2) (+ 5 6))

Although t is the default representation for truth, everything except nil also
counts as true in a logical context.

You can define new functions with defun. It usually takes three or more
arguments: a name, a list of parameters, and one or more expressions that will
make up the body of the function.

One of the most frequently used operators in Common Lisp is let, which allows
you to introduce new local variables.
    
    let ((var val) (var val)) (exp-list) 
    i.e: (let ((x 7)) (format t "X=~A" x)(values x))

'exp-list' is the value returned by let.

You can create a global variable by giving a symbol and a value to defparameter:

    defparameter *glob* 99

In Common Lisp the most general assignment operator is setf. We can use it to do
assignments to eighter kind of variable.

The do macro is the fundamental iteration operator in Common Lisp. Like let, do
can create variables, and the first argument is a list of variable
specifications. Each element of this list can be of the form:

    (variable initial update) 

If we give the name of a function to function(an operator like quote), it will
return the associated object. Just as we can use ' as an abbreviation for quote,
we can use #' as an abbreviation for function.

To refer literally to an integet, we use a series of digits; to refer literally
to a function, we use what's called a lambda expression. A lambda expression is
a list containing the symbol lambda, followed by a list of parameters, followed
by a body of zero or more expressions.

In lisp, values have types, not variables.(me: like other script languages)

Chapter 3 (me: some functions operated on list)

Conses provide a convenient representation for pairs of any type.(me: pair)

    (setf x (cons 'a 'b))

The reason Lisp has no pointers is that every value is conceptually a pointer.
When you assign a value to a variable or store it in a data structure, what gets
stored is actually a pointer to the value.

...(some sections i have not read)

Chapter 4 (me: array,string, structure, hash)

In Common List, you can make an array by calling make-array with a list of
dimensions as the first argument.

    (make-array '(2 3) :initial-element nil)

If you want just a one-dimensional array, you can give an integer instead of a
list as the first argument to make-array:
    
    (make-array 4 :initial-element nil)

Strings are vectors of characters.

In Common Lisp the type sequence includes both lists and vectors.

A structure can be considered as a delux kind of vector. To define a structure,
  we use defstruct.

    (defstruct point x y)

This defines a point to be a structure with two fields, x and y. It also
implicitly defines the functions make-point, point-p, copy-point, point-x, and
point-y.

You create a hash table by calling make-hash-table, which has no required
arguments:

    setf ht (make-hash-table)

Chapter 5

Common Lisp has three basic operators for creating blocks of code: progn, block,
and tagbody.

The expressions with progn body are evaluated in order, and the value of the
last is returned.

A block is like a progn with a name and an emergency exit.

	(block head 
	 	(return-from head 'result))

There is also a return macro, which returns its argument as the value of an
enclosing block named nil.

Another operator we've used to group expressions is let.(me: try to undestand
the difference between let and let*, try these codes below:

    (setf x 1)
    (let ((x 2) (y (+ x 1))) (+ x y)) (me: refer 'x' in setf)
    ---------------------------------
    (let* ((x 2) (y (+ x 1))) (+ x y)) (me: refer 'x' in let)
   
)

So what if you do want the value of one new variable to depend on the value of
another variable established by the same expression? In that case you would use
a variant called let*.

The simplest after if is when, which takes an expression and a body of code. The
body will be evaluated if the test expression returns true.

	(when (oddp that)
	 	(format t "Hmm, that's odd")
		(+ that 1))

The opposite of when is unless, it takes the same arguments, but the body will
be evaluated only if the test expression returns false.

The mother of all conditions is cond. When the cond expression is evaluated,
 the condition are evaluated in order until one of them returns true.

    (cond ((cond-exp) (exp)(exp))
          ((cond-exp) (exp)(exp))

When you want to compare a value against a series of constants, there is case.

(me: here is a typecase which can get the type of a symbol:

    (typecase 'a
      (number 'number)
      (list 'list)
      (t 't))

)

The basic iteration operator is do. (variable initial update)

Besides do and do* there are several special-purpose iteration operators. To
iterate over the elements of a list, we can use dolist:

    (dolist (x '(a b c d) 'done)
        (format t "~A " x))

The third expression within the initial list will be evaluated and returned as
the value of the dolist when iteration terminates.

In Common Lisp, an expression can return zero or more values. The maximum number
of return values is implementation-dependent, but it will be at least 19.

If something is expeting only one value, all but the first will be discarded.

Chapter 6 (Functions)

The predicate fboundp tells whether there is a function with a symbol as its
name. 

    (fboundp '+)

If a symbol is the name of a function, symbol-function will return it.

    (symbol-function '+)
    (setf (symbol-function 'add2)
        #'(lambda (x) (+ x 2)))

Functions defined via defun or setf of symbol-function are global functions.

Local functions can be defined with labels, which is a kind of let for
functions.

    (labels ((add10 (x) (+ x 10))) 
        (add10 2))

Section 5.2 showed how a let expression could be understood as a function call.
A do expression can be similarly explained as a call to a recursive function.


Since we have seen several functions that could take varying numbers of
arguments. To write such functions ourselves, we need to use something called a
rest parameter.

If we insert the token &rest before the last variable in the parameter list of a
function, then when the function is called, this variable will be set to a list
of all the remaining arguments.

    (defun our-funcall (fn &rest args)
      (apply fn args))
    (our-funcall '+ 2 3 4) (me: args can contain more than args)

We have also seen operators in which arguments could be omitted, and would
default to certain values. Such parameters are called optional parameters.
(By contrast, ordinary parameters are sometimes called required parameters)

If the symbole &optional occurs in the parameter list of a function:

    (defun philosoph (thing &optional property)
       (list thing 'is property)) (me: property is either nil or something)

then all the arguments after it are optional, and default to nil.

We give an explicit default by enclosiing it in a list with the parameter.

    (defun philosoph (thing &optional (property 'fun)) ...

If you put the symbol &key in a parameter list, then all the parameters after it
are optional. Moreover, when the function is called, these parameters will be
identified not by their position, but by symbolic tags that precede them.

    (defun keylist(a &key x y z)
        (list a x y z)
    (keylist 1 :y 2) 
    (1 nil 2 nil)

The way to get reusable software is to write programs bottom-up, and
programmers don't have to be object-oriented to be written bottom-up.

When a function refers to a variable defined outside it, it's called a free
variable. A function that refers to a free lexical variable is called a closure.    

With dynamic scope, we look for a variable in the environment where the function
is called, not in the environment where it was defined.(me: consider this:
    (let ((x 10))
        (defun foo()
            x))
    (let ((x 20)) (foo)) (me: foo refer 'x' where it was defined)
    10
)

To cause a variable to have dynamic scope, we must declare it to be special in
any context where it occurs.

    (let ((x 10))
        (defun foo()
            (declare (special x))
            x))

The usual way to compile Lisp code is not to compile functions individually, but
to compile whole files with compile-file.

A recursive algorithm solves a problem by dividing it into a finite number of
similar, but smaller, problems.

Chapter 7 (Input and Output)

There are two kinds of streams, character streams and binary streams.
    (setf path (make-pathname :name "myfile"))
    (setf str (open path :direction :output :if-exists :supersede))
    (format str "Something~%")
    (close str)

Chapter 8 (Symbols)

In fact, a symbol can have any string as its name. Common Lisp is not
case-sensitive.

Any sequence of characters between vertical bars(me: | ) is treated as a symbol.

    (symbol-name '|a b c|)
    "a b c"

In Common Lisp every symbol has a property-list, or plist. (me: there is a
 key-value list associated to a symbol)

    (get 'name 'color)
    (setf (get 'name 'color) 'red)
    (symbol-plist 'name) (me: get 'name' property-list)

In Common Lisp, property list aren't used very much. They have largely been
superseded by hash tables.

There is more to symbols than meets thy eye.

Conceptually, packages are symbol-tables, mapping names to symbols. Every
ordinary symbols belongs to a particular package. A symbol that belongs to a
package is said to be interned in that package.

    (intern "pkgName")

Not all symbols are interned. Uninterned symbols are called gensyms.

Here is what you might put at the top of a file containing a distinct package of
code:

    (defpackage "MY-APPLICATION"
                (:use "COMMON-LISP" "MY-UTILITIES")
                (:nickname "APP")
                (:export "WIN" "LOSE" "DRAW"))
    (in-package my-application)

Symbols in the keyword package (known as keywords) have two unique properties:
they always evaluate to themselves, and you can refer to them anywhere simply as
:x, instead keyword:x. (me: means there is a pakcage named 'keyword', and the
 symbols in this package can be refered as :symbol)


Chapter 9 (Numbers)

Common Lisp provides four distinct types of numbers: integers, floating-point
numbers, ratios, and complex numbers.


The Complex number a+bi is writtent as #c(a b).

(me: ignore this chapter)

Chapter 10 (Macros)

Eval takes an expression, evaluates it, and returns its value. (me: it's not a
 good way to generate codes in Lisp as the book said)

    (eval '(+ 1 2 3))

The most common way to write programs that write programs is by defining macros.
Marros are usually defined by calling defmacro.

    (defmacro nil! (x)
        (list 'setf x nil))

This defines a new operator called nil!, which will take one argument.

To test a function, we call it, but to test a macro, we look at its expansion.
The function macroexpand-1 takes a macro call and generates its expansion.

    (macroexpand-1 '(nil! x))

A macro call can expand into another macro call. When the compiler encounters a
macro call, it simply keeps expanding it until it is no longer one.

Like a regular quote, a backquote(`) alone protects its argument from
evaluation.

If you prefix a comma to something within a backquoted expression, it will be
evaluated. Thus we can use backquote and comma together to build list templates. 

    (setf a 1 b 2)
    `(a is ,a and b is ,b)
    (A is 1 AND B IS 2) (me: as you see, a and b after ',' has been evaluated)

Comma-at(,@) is like comma, but splices its argument(which should be a list).
Instead of the list itself, its elements are inserted in the template.

    (setf lst '(a b c))
    `(lst is ,lst)
    `(its elements are ,@lst)
    (ITS ELEMENTS ARE A B C)

The most general solution (to solve name conflit in macro and the place where
 the macro expands) is not to use ordinary symbols anywhere they might be
captured. Instead we can use gensyms.

    (defmacro ntimes (n &rest body)
        (let ((g (gensym)))
            `(do ((,g 0 (+ ,g 1)))
                 ((>= ,g ,n))
                 ,@body)))

The function pprint, which prints expressions indented like code, is specially
useful when looking at macro expansions.

    (pprint (macroexpand-1 '(cond (a b) )))

Chapter 12 (Structure)

Share structure:
    
    (setf part (list 'b 'c)
          whole1 (cons 1 part)
          whole2 (cons 2 part))

If we want to avoid sharing structure, we can do it by copying.

    (defun our-copy-list (lst)
      (if (null lst)
           nil
           (cons (car lst) (our-copy-list (cdr lst)))))

Lists can be car-or cdr-circular. Lisp can represent circular and shared
structure.



